## Category Theory 1.1: Motivation and Phylosophy

- Category theory is the most abstract part of mathematics
- it has a relationship with functional programming


### Programming Paradigms

- Touring machne - primitive machine that stamps a paper tag. You can program it by telling it what to do, like assembly language, that is, without high level programming language. Pre-existed computers. It's one approach to programming.
- Lambda calculus is another approach to programming. Math in terms of how they can be executed by transforming things.
- Procedural programming - divide problem in procedures. `name(arg) return val`.
- Object oriented programming - objects can be composed. They hide things. Goals is to hide object's implementation. You care about interface to make objects talk to each other. (composability)
  - Composability - compose objects to interface with others
  - Abstraction - hide details
  - Reusability - building blocks that you can rearrage
  - Concurrent code/ parallel programming does not mix well with OOP because objects hide mutation (state gets changed inside the object and we don't know how) and objects share static data. Mixing sharing and mutation is called Data-race (you can lock objectts, but they are not composable)
- Functional programming - abstract things into functions. No mutation (no global state). You can compose data structures safely because everything is immutable.

---

- Ideas and theory are easy, but languages overcomplicate them with their higher abstraction strutures.
- Instead, if you use math (category theory) in programming, you can program better.
- Category theory becomes the higher level language above all other programming languages.
- You bring category theory ideas to implement them in any language.
- Category theory is also an abstraction in math. If can be applied to algebra, set theory, etc.
- Isomorphism of math - multiple branches in math (type theory, algebra, set theory) have theory in common. That is category theory.
